## What’s the Most Convenient Optical Image Format for Daily Use?

There are many different optical disc image formats out there, with varying purposes. They support different features and amounts of information stored. Some of these have become commonly used standards that are very widely supported throughout different software, and those will (mostly) be the ones covered by this guide. And while it's always best to store the most information possible for an archival copy, it's often easier to keep the simplest possible copy of an image on hand for daily use due to factors such as software support.

Unfortunately, some discs *really* don't want to be copied, and need a more advanced image format than most in order for the content to be usable. Not all of these formats are open or documented either, but are important to know about and to use for tougher to copy discs. Keep in mind that this guide is only intended to cover the most basic, widely known and used formats. That means that other formats (such as Aaru's Aaru Format images) aren't covered here. It's also worth noting that while a format *may* be able to support a copy protection in theory, a copy protected disc also needs to be dumped correctly to that format in order to work. Some copy protections may also need the image to be mounted to a virtual drive in a very specific way in order to work properly.

### ISO-9660 Images (.ISO)

ISO images are the simplest possible image format there is, and are named after the ISO-9660 filesystem used on most PC CD-ROMs. This has become a misnomer, however, as the image format is also used for discs with other filesystems. 

The reason that this format is so simple, is that it's essentially just a copy of the disc's filesystem that is present on track 1 and doesn't store *any* additional data. That means that any specific information about the disc's structure is lost, along with any other tracks. This makes it essentially the worst image format to use in terms of preservation, but the best to use in terms of program compatibility. Due its simplicity, it's also compatible with a wider variety of media, including CDs, DVDs, and BDs. DVDs and BDs are most commonly dumped to ISO images, due to most discs simply not requiring any more data than what's stored in them to function.

### CDRWIN Cue Sheets (.CUE/.BIN)

CUE images are the next simplest commonly used image format. At its core, the format is made up of a .CUE file and a .BIN file. The .CUE file contains metadata about the image, along with essential information about the disc such as the track and session information. The .BIN file itself is, basically, a raw binary file that contains the disc's (more or less) exact contents. The reason for this is that the data of the .BIN shouldn't change between different dumps of the same disc (whether from different users, drives, or software), but the .CUE can contain other metadata that's expected to differ. There's also multiple ways that the metadata and other information in a .CUE file can be organized, with sessions being a particularly non-standarized feature that can cause confusion between different programs.

The .CUE file itself is also human readable, making it a particularly easy format to customize and alter by hand, as the .BIN file will generally be unaltered even between differing CUE standards. It also supports MANY more features compared to ISO, such as multiple tracks, bad sectors, different track types, and many others. This makes it much more suited to supporting more complicated CDs, such as games with real audio tracks present or a multitude of copy protections. 

While this format was originally created by the program CDRWIN, it's accessibility and strong feature support meant that it was readily adopted by many other programs, for various different use cases. One of the key disadvantages of this, as already mentioned, is the relative lack of standardization of the format. But this is generally a non-issue, due to the simplicity of the format allowing users to manually change the .CUE file if needed, as long as all the needed data is present in some way. And while several features, such as sessions and subchannels, aren't typically considered supported, the format can be customized to add support for them. The issue with that then is that it takes away another of the key advantages of the format: its exceptional software support. This means that for more difficult to copy discs, other formats designed more specifically for those problems is generally used. One last limitation present in the format is that it's specifically intended for CDs. DVDs and BDs don't contain the additional data that .CUE images are designed to store, and instead can make use of features that CUE very much was *not* designed to support.

### CloneCD Images (.CCD)

CCD is one step above CUE in terms of feature support, though it doesn't have nearly the same software support or customizability. It follows the same basic structure as CUE, with the .CCD file being the equivalent of the .CUE, and the .IMG file being the equivalent of the .BIN. On top of this, CCD also usually has a .SUB file, which is dedicated to storing the subchannel data of CDs. While the .CUE was essentially human-readable information about the dump's metadata and the disc's structure, the .CCD is a more accurate copy of the disc's structure and doesn't contain metadata in the same as CUE. 

It's much more rigidly standard than CUE, having been created for the CloneCD program. Due to CloneCD's ability to create generally high quality dumps, with a support for the majority of optical based copy protections, this makes CCD one of the best formats to dump copy protected games to. So while CUE is moreso intended to be accessible for more use cases, CCD is much better for making good quality disc dumps intended to either be directly emulated in a virtual drive, or burned to a disc to play.

It's also of note that the .IMG itself should be identical to the .BIN, as they're both essentially raw copies of the disc's data. It also only supports CDs as well, for the same reasons that CUE only supports CDs. This means that in practice, a CCD image can be thought of a more rigidly defined CUE image that also supports subchannels.

### Media Descriptor File (v1) (.MDS/.MDF)

The MDS format is, once again, similar to CUE and CCD in the basic structure. The .MDS file is similar to the .CCD file in that it again contains information about the disc's structure (along with additional data), while *not* being presented in a human readable format. The .MDF file is also similar to the .BIN and .IMG files, except that it can also contain the subchannel data directly, without using a .SUB file. This has pros and cons, with the main pro being that there are less files present, decluttering things slightly. The main con is that subchannel data is essentially never consistently dumped, meaning that an .MDF file that contains this data will not be usable for reliable DAT'ing, where the exact file hash needs to be consistent between dumps. Otherwise, the content of the .MDF file is equivalent to the data present in the .BIN and .IMG files where applicable.

The main use-case of this format is the fact that it supports more devious copy protection schemes directly, most notably ones that make use of DPM. Essentially, some copy protections will use the time it takes to read certain sectors to verify the authenticity of a disc, where the disc has been mastered to purposefully make these timings non-standard. Alcohol 120%, the program this format was originally designed for, is able to make measurements of these timings and store this data within the .MDS file. This data is only usable with very specific virtual drives, including Alcohol 120% and Daemon Tools.

This format is also the simplest and most accessible for most DVD copy protections, as the MDS file is also able to contain additional data needed for most DVD copy protections, such as DMI. It's also worth noting that for DVDs, the .MDF file should always match the .ISO file created by most other software. This means that if you have access to the specific data needed, you're able to craft a functioning .MDS file yourself and rename a standard .ISO file to create a functioning image.

Thankfully, this format as a whole is decently well documented, and able to be converted to and from easily. The main issue is that very few other formats support DPM, and there are very few alternative virtual drives able to run games that require it. None of them have so far significantly caught on, and so aren't mentioned here.

### Media Descriptor File (v2) (.MDS/.MDF/.MDX)

Lastly is the MDSv2, or for ease of reference, MDX format. It was specifically created by Daemon Tools as an extension to MDSv1, and offers additional features. And while it's able to dump to .MDS and .MDF files, these MDSv2 images aren't compatible with software other than Daemon Tools, and is in fact obfuscated to prevent other programs supporting it. My personal preference is to use the .MDX files, which are a new addition to MDSv2 specifically, to avoid confusion due to the overlapping extensions. The .MDX file itself is essentially just the .MDS and .MDF file combined into a single file, further reducing clutter as well as differentiating itself from MDSv1.

This format is specifically best used for the most stubborn of copy protections, most notably Tages as it uses twin sectors. Daemon Tools is currently the best tool to dump these discs with, and it, unfortunately, is only able to dump twin sector protected discs to this obfuscated format. This means that these images are only currently usable with Daemon Tools, and the exact method it uses to dump and store twin sectors is also currently unknown due to this obfuscation. This means that this format should only be used when absolutely needed, and even then should also be supplemented by a dump from a disc in an alternate, documented format.

### In Conclusion

In my opinion, it's best to have two dumps of a disc on hand. One created in the format that stores the most data possible, and one in the simplest possible format that supports the disc for sake of ease of use. For normal purposes, most would consider CCD to be the best format to use for most CDs, with MDS being used for DVDs or particularly stubborn CDs. I personally dump to CCD using [DiscImageCreator](https://github.com/saramibreak/DiscImageCreator) as well as AARUF using [Aaru](https://github.com/aaru-dps/Aaru), but the most important thing is that the dump you create *works*. Even if you don't care too highly about preservation, it's important to not "underdump" a disc to a format that doesn't support it. There's quite a few disc images online that aren't usable because the user dumped it to ISO when it has a copy protection that requires CUE, and it's important to make sure you're not one of the people doing it!